A Court of Thorns and Roses is a fantasy romance series by American author Sarah J. Maas, which follows the journey of 19-year-old Feyre Archeron after she is brought into the faerie lands of Prythian. The first book of the series, A Court of Thorns and Roses, was published in May 2015. The series centers on Feyre's adventures across Prythian and the faerie courts, following the epic love story and fierce struggle that ensues after she enters the fae lands. The series has sold over 13 million copies. There are currently five novels in the series, with the sixth scheduled to release on October 27, 2026, and the seventh on January 12, 2027. An eighth installment is set to conclude the continuous story told across books six, seven and eight.
The series is a New York Times Best Seller and had been optioned by Hulu for a television series adaptation by Ronald D. Moore. Variety magazine reported in 2024 that the project was still in development at Hulu, but faced an uncertain future. In 2025, the series was officially scrapped.


== Books ==


=== Main ===


=== Companions ===
A Court of Thorns and Roses Coloring Book (2017)


== Development ==
Maas initially intended the series as a retelling of the fairy tales Beauty and the Beast, East of the Sun and West of the Moon, and Tam Lin. These tales inspired the finished series, though it was not ultimately a dedicated retelling.
She began writing A Court of Thorns and Roses in early 2009, with the first draft taking about five weeks to complete.
A Court of Mist and Fury's first draft was written entirely in a split point of view between Feyre and Rhysand. The second book went through multiple name changes, including A Court of Wind and Stone, A Court of Calm and Fury, A Court of Stars and Smoke, A Court of Wings and Stars, A Court of Venom and Silver and A Court of Stars and Frost. Like the first novel, the second is based upon multiple fairy tales and myths, including Hades and Persephone, with the Greek mythology-inspired characters such as Rhysand and Feyre and their home in the Night Court. Other fairy tale inspirations include Hansel and Gretel, which spawned the character of the Weaver, and the Book of Exodus, which loosely inspired parts of the backstory for Miryam and Drakon.
The final cover of A Court of Wings and Ruin was designed by Adrian Dadich, with the dress pictured on the cover originally designed by Charlie Bowater and later adapted by Dadich.
On July 12, 2016, Entertainment Weekly reported that Maas was writing five new books for the series, that would include two novellas and three further novels which would be set before and after the first trilogy.
In 2020, the series was reprinted and published by Bloomsbury with new illustrated covers. A Court of Thorns and Roses has existed between the Young Adult and New Adult fiction categories since the publication of the first book. At the time A Court of Thorns and Roses was published, the New Adult categorization had not caught on the way publishers hoped it would. Maas agreed to publish the book as YA so long as her editor did not censor any of the sexual content. The A Court of Thorns and Roses series is now classified as New Adult.
In September 2023, Maas publicly discussed writing a sixth book for the series. On July 11, 2025, a post on Maas' Instagram account indicated she has completed the first draft. In March 2026, Sarah J. Maas confirmed on the Call Her Daddy podcast that the sixth through eighth books would be "a book told in four parts". The sixth book is set to be released on October 27, 2026, and the seventh book on January 12, 2027. The eighth book is yet to be written and has no release date attached.


== Reception ==


=== Awards and nominations ===


=== Accolades ===


=== Censorship in the United States ===
In 2022, according to the American Library Association's Office of Intellectual Freedom, A Court of Mist and Fury was tied for the tenth-most banned and challenged book in the United States. In 2023 a school district in Mason City, Iowa, made international news when they banned the book from library shelves after running a list of books through ChatGPT and asking it if the books, "contain a description or depiction of a sex act."
In 2023, the Central Media Advisory Committee for Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools in North Carolina voted to ban A Court of Frost and Starlight, the fourth installment in the series. The committee declares responsibility for the "review and removal of books" as a result of material that is "educationally unsuitable, pervasively vulgar or obscene, or inappropriate to the age, maturity or grade level of students." The book is still accessible online, but students can be denied access due to parental controls.
In February 2024, individuals in the Rutherford County Schools (RCS) library system in Tennessee were "...quietly instructed by higher ups to remove 20 books from all RCS library shelves", with the entirety of this five-book series being included among those twenty selections; an internal review by RCS determined that two of those twenty titles did not meet the standard for obscenity as defined by Tennessee state law and were accordingly allowed to remain upon school shelves.  The removal of the eighteen remaining books occurred without seeking input from librarians and without due process policy for the school system being applied; as of mid-March 2024, all of those eighteen books (still including this entire series) remain off RCS shelves.  The Rutherford County Library Alliance, a nonprofit organization whose mission statement defines them as being "...dedicated to safeguarding the principles of intellectual freedom and unrestricted access to information within the public library system of Rutherford County, Tennessee", is in the process of challenging this censorship.
In 2024, all five books in the series were among 13 banned from all Utah public schools by the state school board for containing "objective sensitive material." One additional Maas book, Empire of Storms, was also banned.
In 2025, the American Library Association reported that A Court of Thorns and Roses had the 7th highest count of requests by people or political groups for removal from libraries in the USA that year.


== Adaptations ==
A Court of Thorns and Roses was optioned by Jo Bamford's and Piers Tempest's Tempo Productions in November 2015. The producers revealed in 2018 they had hired Rachel Hirons to work as the movie's screenwriter.
In March 2021, it was announced that A Court of Thorns and Roses series had been opted for a television adaptation by 20th Television for Hulu. The series is set to be developed by Ronald D. Moore alongside Maas. In an interview with The New York Times, Maas confirmed that she was developing the project with the writers and the showrunner as the executive producer of the adaptation. As of December 2023, no cast had been set, but writing for the script has continued for the adaptation. In February 2024, it was announced by TVLine that the adaptation had been scrapped and would not be shopped to other networks; however, Variety reported that these reports were inaccurate. In February 2025, the adaptation was officially scrapped.


== References ==