The Croix de guerre 1914–1918 (English: War Cross) was a French military decoration, the first version of the Croix de Guerre.  It was created to recognize French and allied soldiers who were cited for valorous service during World War I, similar to the British mentioned in dispatches but with multiple degrees equivalent to other nations' decorations for courage.
Soon after the outbreak of World War I, French military officials felt that a new military award had to be created. At that time, the Citation du jour ("Daily Citation") already existed to acknowledge soldiers, but it was just a sheet of paper. Only the Médaille Militaire and Legion of Honour were bestowed for courage in the field, due to the numbers now involved, a new decoration was required in earnest.  At the end of 1914, General Boëlle, Commandant in Chief of the French 4th Army Corps, tried to convince the French administration to create a formal military award. Maurice Barrès, the noted writer and parliamentarian for Paris, gave Boëlle support in his efforts.
On 23 December 1914, the French parliamentarian Georges Bonnefous proposed a legislative bill to create the Croix de la Valeur Militaire ("Cross of Military Valour") signed by 66 other parliamentarians. Émile Driant, a parliamentarian who served in the war zone during much of this time, became its natural spokesman when he returned to the legislature. On 18 January 1915, Driant submitted this bill but the name of the military award was renamed to Croix de guerre ("War Cross"). After parliamentary discussions, the bill was adopted on 2 April 1915.
World War I began in 1914 and ended in 1918, so the final name adopted is "Croix de guerre 1914–1918".


== Award statute ==
Every Croix de guerre awarded carries at least one citation for gallantry or courage to a member of any rank of the French military or of an allied army. Ribbon devices indicate the importance or degree of the soldier's role during the action cited. The lowest degree is represented by a bronze star and the highest degree is represented by a bronze palm. The cross is only awarded once and subsequent actions worthy of citations will be limited to additional ribbon devices on the originally received insignia.  The number of ribbon devices on a Croix de guerre is not limited, some awards, especially to ace fighter pilots, had extremely long ribbons with dozens of stars and palms.
The Croix de guerre 1914-1918 was attributed to:

French and allied soldiers individually cited for a wartime act of gallantry;
Civilians and militarized personnel individually cited for a wartime act of gallantry;
Automatically to soldiers and civilians not specifically cited for a Croix de guerre but awarded the Légion d'honneur or Médaille militaire for the highest acts of wartime valour and gazetted in the Official Journal of the French Republic;
Collectively, to army units, ships or air squadrons;
To cities and villages, martyrs of war, destroyed, ravaged or bombed by the enemy (2952 towns received the Croix de guerre 1914–1918, in this case, always awarded with palm).
Soldiers who were/are members of units recognized by a collective unit award of the Croix de guerre may wear the Fourragère of the Croix de guerre 1914-1918 as long as they remain members of that unit.  Soldiers who actively took part as members of units during repeated feats of arms recognized by more than one collective award of the Croix de guerre may continue to wear the fourragère even after leaving the meritorious unit.  Battle streamers in the colours of the Croix de guerre 1914-1918 are affixed to the colours of recipient units.


== Award description ==
The cross was designed by the sculptor Paul-Albert Bartholomé. It is 37 mm wide, Florentine bronze cross pattée, with two crossed swords pointing up between the arms. The obverse centre medallion bears the relief image of the French Republic in the form of the bust of a young woman wearing a Phrygian cap surrounded by the circular relief inscription RÉPUBLIQUE FRANCAISE (FRENCH REPUBLIC).  Not knowing how long the war would last, the reverse centre medallion bears the dates 1914–1915, 1914–1916, 1914–1917 and finally 1914–1918.
The cross is suspended by a ring through a suspension loop cast atop the upper cross arm.  It hangs from a 37 mm wide green silk moiré ribbon with seven narrow 1,5 mm wide vertical red stripes evenly spaced and two 1 mm red edge stripes.

The lowest degree is represented by a bronze star and the highest degree is represented by a silver palm.  The cross was worn with the appropriate attachments to signify the singular or multiple awards of the decoration.

Bronze star (étoile de bronze): for those who were mentioned at the regiment,  battalion or brigade level.
Silver star (étoile d'argent): for those who were cited at the division level.
Silver gilt star (étoile vermeil): for those who were cited at the corps level.
Bronze palm (palme de bronze): for those who were cited at the army level.
Silver palm (palme d'argent): could be worn in lieu of five bronze palms.


=== Award Ribbons ===


== Notable French recipients (partial list) ==

General Charles de Gaulle (1 citation)
Fighter ace lieutenant Charles Nungesser (30 citations)
Fighter ace captain Georges Guynemer (26 citations)
General Edgard de Larminat (4 citations)
General Joseph de Goislard de Monsabert (7 citations)
Colonel Théophile Marie Brébant (4 citations)
General Jean Vallette d'Osia (6 citations)
General Raoul Salan (1 citation)
Fighter ace colonel René Fonck (29 citations)
General Marie-Pierre Kœnig (2 citations)
General Raoul Magrin-Vernerey (11 citations)
Fighter ace lieutenant-colonel Charles Nuville (10 citations)
Fighter ace captain Georges Madon (10 citations)
Marshal Joseph Joffre (1 citation)
General Robert Nivelle (3 citations)
Private Albert Severin Roche (12 citations)


== Notable foreign recipients (partial list) ==
Colonel Araki Sadao  Empire of Japan
Brigadier General John William Barker  United States
Fighter ace Air Marshal William Avery "Billy" Bishop   Canada
Field Marshal Petar Bojović  Kingdom of Serbia
Lieutenant General Lewis H. Brereton  United States
Lieutenant Stanley Bruce  Australia
Major General Charles Budworth  United Kingdom
Corporal Eugene Bullard, French Air Force  United States
Fighter ace Captain Vernon Castle  United Kingdom
Carrier Pigeon Cher Ami, Lost Battalion (World War I)  United States
Fighter ace Air Vice Marshal Raymond Collishaw  Canada
General Sir Arthur William Currie  Canada
Fighter ace Major Roderic Dallas  Australia
Private Herman Davis  United States
Brigadier General Edward Terence Donnelly  United States
Brigadier General Lucius Loyd Durfee  United States
Field Marshal John French, 1st Earl of Ypres  United Kingdom
Private William Hicks  United Kingdom
Colonel Fukuda Hikosuke  Empire of Japan
Director General Stephen Galatti, American Field Service  United States
Lieutenant William F. Howe  United States
Brigadier General Evan M. Johnson  United States
Sergeant Henry Johnson  United States
Fighter ace Captain Robert A. Little  Australia
General Douglas MacArthur  United States
Lieutenant Giuseppe Franchi Maggi, Royal Italian Army  Kingdom of Italy
General George C. Marshall  United States
Fighter ace Major James McCudden  United Kingdom
Corporal Harry Miner   Canada
Field Marshal Živojin Mišić  Kingdom of Serbia
General John Monash  Australia
Lieutenant Colonel "Mad" Harry Murray  Australia
Air Chief Marshal Sir Keith Rodney Park  New Zealand
General Sir Archibald Paris  United Kingdom
General George S. Patton  United States
Captain Eddie Rickenbacker  United States
Private Needham Roberts  United States
Lieutenant Quentin Roosevelt  United States
Sergeant Milunka Savić  Serbia
Lieutenant Colonel Clarence O. Sherrill  United States
General Phraya Thephatsadin  Siam
Philanthropist Julia Hunt Catlin Park DePew Taufflieb  United States
Lieutenant Stephen W. Thompson, Lafayette Escadrille  United States
Sergeant Alvin C. York  United States
Lieutenant Colonel John Creagh Scott United Kingdom


== French recipient units (partial list) ==
1st Infantry Regiment
54th Infantry Regiment
126th Infantry Regiment
2nd Battalions of Light Infantry of Africa
1st Cuirassier Regiment
12th Cuirassier Regiment
6th Dragoon Regiment
9th Hussar Regiment
1st Artillery Regiment
2nd Dragoon Regiment
1st Moroccan Division
French battleship Bouvet
French battleship Gaulois
French submarine Bernouilli
Lafayette Escadrille  France  United States


== Allied recipient units (partial list) ==
Portuguese Expeditionary Corps 15th Infantry Battalion  Portugal
Russian Expeditionary Force Russian Legion Battalion  Russia
The Black Watch  United Kingdom
Devonshire Regiment  United Kingdom 
5th Battery R.F.A.  United Kingdom 
2nd Motorized Field Ambulance  United Kingdom
24th Field Ambulance  United Kingdom 
5th Field Artillery Regiment  United States
7th Field Artillery Regiment  United States
2nd Infantry Division  United States
15th Field Artillery Regiment  United States
3rd Infantry Division  United States
4th Infantry Division  United States
16th Infantry Division  United States
26th Infantry Division  United States
32nd Infantry Division  United States
119th Field Artillery Regiment  United States
93rd Infantry Division  United States
16th Infantry Regiment  United States
18th Infantry Regiment  United States
26th Infantry Regiment  United States
39th Infantry Regiment  United States
39th Infantry Division  United States
104th Infantry Regiment  United States
369th Infantry Regiment  United States
370th Infantry Regiment  United States
1st Engineer Battalion  United States
5th Marine Regiment  United States
6th Marine Regiment  United States


== Recipient cities (partial list) ==
Reims
Paris
Dinant  Belgium
Montdidier
Calais
Épernay
Lille
Nancy
Amiens


== See also ==

Ribbons of the French military and civil awards
Croix de guerre 1939–1945
Croix de guerre des théâtres d'opérations extérieures 
Croix de Guerre (Belgium)


== References ==


== External links ==

France Phaléristique (in French)
Museum of the Legion of Honour (in French)