Games Done Quick (GDQ) is a semiannual video game speedrun charity marathon held in the United States, originally organized by the Speed Demos Archive and SpeedRunsLive communities. Since 2015, it has been handled by Games Done Quick, LLC. Held since 2010, the events have raised money for several charities.
The two flagship events held by Games Done Quick are Awesome Games Done Quick (AGDQ), held in early January every year, which raises money for the Prevent Cancer Foundation, and Summer Games Done Quick (SGDQ), usually held in late June or early July every year, which raises money for Doctors Without Borders. Both events last for seven days. In addition to these events, GDQ hosts several other broadcasts throughout the year, including smaller marathons supporting different charities, one-off events for special occasions, and regular GDQ Hotfix programming throughout the year.
The events are broadcast live on Twitch and is simulacasted on YouTube since AGDQ 2026. Viewers are encouraged to donate for incentives during the stream such as selecting the name of the save-file or main characters, having the runners attempt more difficult challenges, and entering sweepstakes for a chance to win prizes. As of January 2026, over $59.8 million has been raised through over a million individual donations.


== Format ==

Speedrunners take turns demonstrating their prowess at beating various video games in the quickest possible time, done in front of an audience as well as a livestream through Twitch. Sometimes these runs may be executed in an unusual or specific way, such as fully completing every level, completing a game blindfolded, or featuring multiple runners racing against one another to complete a game first. Video games run in Games Done Quick events include both retro and modern titles. The runs typically feature commentary from the runner(s) or experienced commentators, as well as donation messages read by an announcer.
Most of the popular runs feature video game glitches and discussion between the runner and the commentators, most frequently describing techniques or using observational humor and banter. Humor and banter is especially used for non-interactive or repetitive sequences that don't require the runner to use much or any skill. Donations from viewers may feature humorous comments that contain inside jokes among the speedrunning community, as well as more personal acknowledgments concerning donations. Because of the live broadcast and wider audience, runners and commentators are encouraged to refrain from using strong profanity and offensive behavior.
When donating, donors have the option to put their money towards a particular incentive. These incentives can be in the form of bonus speedruns, showcases of additional tricks or glitches, or an in-game decision such as naming the player character.


== History ==

Writer and speedrunner Eric Koziel identifies two important precursors to Games Done Quick: the "Desert Bus for Hope" donation drive organized by LoadingReadyRun in November 2007, and a series of charity speedrun marathons held by TheSpeedGamers starting in March 2008.
Users of the site Speed Demos Archive decided to hold a charity marathon in January 2010, during MAGFest 8. It was themed around 8-bit and 16-bit video games and thus dubbed "Classic Games Done Quick" (after the 1990s speedrunning project Quake Done Quick). Internet connectivity problems at the MAGFest hotel forced SDA administrator Mike Uyama to relocate the event to his mother's residence, but it raised over $10,000 for CARE.
Following that initial success, the first Awesome Games Done Quick marathon was held in January 2011, expanding from two days to five days, incorporating newer games such as Halo and Portal, and raising more than $50,000 for the Prevent Cancer Foundation. The first Summer Games Done Quick was held in August 2011, raising $20,000 for the Organization for Autism Research. Since then, both Awesome Games Done Quick and Summer Games Done Quick have recurred annually, soon raising significantly larger amounts than these early marathons.
A one-off additional marathon was held in March 2011 to support victims of the earthquake and tsunami in Japan; Japan Relief Done Quick raised over $25,000. In addition, a one-off promotional event was held on March 20, 2015, to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the God of War franchise. Over the course of five hours, God of War Done Quick ended up raising $3,500 for The AbleGamers Foundation.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Summer 2020 marathon, both 2021 marathons, and the Winter 2022 marathon were held as virtual events. In-person attendance returned for SGDQ 2022 under strict social distancing, masking, and vaccine mandate protocol, with all attendees required to have a full series of COVID-19 vaccine and booster dose, while also continuing to intersperse remote runners alongside those present on-stage. The Winter AGDQ 2023 event was intended to be an in-person event held in Orlando, Florida, but was moved to a virtual event after controversies due to the Florida state government's stances on LGBT rights and COVID-19 (the state strictly prohibits vaccine mandates). Breaking the hotel contract carried significant financial consequences for the organization; GDQ Black In A Flash and events coordinator Vanessa "PleasantlyTwstd" B described it as "a make-or-break deal" that "set back any ambitious expansion because the budget was tight for the next couple of years," while Uyama noted that low attendance driven by Florida's legislation could have caused even greater financial losses had they proceeded, and GDQ director of operations Matt Merkle stated that the organization "was not going to risk attendee lives over money." Ahead of the event, Uyama announced that he would be stepping down from his role in GDQ after 13 years "to take care of my health and kind of focus on different activities". In February 2023, it was announced he had postponed his departure to cover for his successor's illness.
Over the course of its early years, GDQ faced criticism for permitting casual bigotry among runners and commentators, and its Twitch chat was largely unmoderated. Founder Mike Uyama later acknowledged his own limited awareness during this period, stating: "I didn't really have any knowledge of LGBTQ+ and queer spaces and proper representation... I remember it wasn't really until 2012 or 2013 that I even learned properly what a transgender person was." From 2016 through 2018, GDQ made a more concerted effort to address these issues. GDQ eventually adopted what director of operations Matt Merkle described as a zero-tolerance policy toward harassment, noting: "We decided quite a few years ago that we were going to have a zero-tolerance policy for various types of harassment... We had to ban a few people." GDQ also expanded its outreach to underrepresented groups through satellite organizations and dedicated programming such as Frame Fatales and its regular Hotfix streams.
Over time, a cultural tradition has emerged at GDQ events: donors, whose messages are read aloud during speedruns, began regularly signing off with the phrase "trans rights." This practice became so established that in-person audiences have come to respond by shouting "trans rights" back in unison, regardless of the time of day during the marathon.
Speedrunning records have been set at various GDQ marathons in games including Super Mario Galaxy 2, Superman 64 and Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 3.


== List of marathons ==


=== Awesome Games Done Quick (AGDQ) ===
Originally called Classic Games Done Quick (CGDQ), this annual marathon is held every year in early January.  It raises money for the Prevent Cancer Foundation.


=== Summer Games Done Quick (SGDQ) ===
Introduced in 2011 as a companion to AGDQ, this marathon is usually held in late June or early July and raises money for Doctors Without Borders. Since 2015, the event has typically been held in the Minneapolis–Saint Paul region.


=== Special marathons ===
Games Done Quick Express (GDQx) is an annual three-day marathon held at TwitchCon since 2018. There was no Games Done Quick Express event held in 2020 or 2021 due to the cancellation of TwitchCon those years, nor was there a Games Done Quick Express event held during the 2022 TwitchCon.
Frame Fatales is a week-long marathon featuring only women and non-binary runners. It started in 2019 as a four-day event and started fundraising for the Malala Fund in 2020. As of 2022, the event has been held twice a year in February–March and August–September as Frost Fatales and Flame Fatales, respectively.


== Controversies ==
As GDQ events have become more popular, there have been several controversies, with players and commentators being banned, and with the stream chat having to be muted. GDQ has noted they advise attendees to avoid "topics of conversation that are polarizing or controversial in nature" as well as avoiding harassing other players. Some attendees have been banned for making inappropriate comments, although there are criticisms that some of the bans may be without merit.
In 2017, a commentator, PvtCinnamonBun, on a speedrun of the game Ape Escape 2 for AGDQ 2017, was banned from all future events for supposedly wearing a "Make America Great Again" (MAGA) hat on stream shortly after Donald Trump's election to the United States presidency. The incident occurred during GDQ's broader transition between 2016 and 2018 toward stricter conduct policies; the Aftermath outlet noted that prior to this shift, runners who had brought a MAGA hat to AGDQ or behaved in flagrantly sexist fashion, "among other standouts from years-long histories of edgelord behavior, were able to attend events and gain footholds in the scene." However, according to Kotaku, PvtCinnamonBun's ban was revoked since it was not actually a MAGA hat, but GDQ officials banned him again for supposedly unplugging a power strip cable. Another speedrunner, Cyberdemon531, was also banned from the event for owning the MAGA hat in the first place.
In 2018, speedrunner "BubblesDelFuego", who speedruns Dark Souls and Fallout 4, was banned from all future GDQ events after sharing edible medicinal cannabis with a friend, which resulted in that friend having a panic attack and being transported to the hospital by paramedics. Bubbles consumed edible cannabis for chronic pain resulting from complications with Hodgkin lymphoma. Bubbles told Kotaku that although he understood why he was banned, he believed that the GDQ "enforcement" staff abused their power and were misinformed about tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the active chemical in cannabis.
At SGDQ 2019, speedrunner "QuinnAce" (formerly "ConnorAce") used a spliced run to illegitimately claim the world record on Clustertruck for the "NoAbility%" category, depriving the legitimate record holder from being invited. The run was treated with suspicion due to it not being submitted officially to speedrun.com, with the video being unlisted on YouTube prior to QuinnAce's acceptance into SGDQ. In October 2019, QuinnAce's run was exposed by the YouTuber documentarian Apollo Legend.
At AGDQ 2020, various runners, including "Luzbelheim" (or "Luz"), were scheduled to run a relay playthrough of Final Fantasy VIII. Hours before, however, Luz's Twitter bio went viral for his comment that he hates "feminazism", identifies as "deminonbinary", and he uses the pronouns "luz/luz". Other online news publications negatively reacted to GDQ organizers allowing Luz to play in the relay playthrough. Luz was given a ban without details about its length.
At SGDQ 2022, speedrunner "Mekarazium" admitted that he faked a run of Metal Gear Rising: Revengeance Blade Wolf DLC. The game was played remotely, unlike most of the other games at the event, and the DLC was a donation incentive. While the main game was played live by Mekarazium, the DLC was pre-recorded. Viewers quickly noted discrepancies with the run. Mekarazium admitted to faking the run and was banned from future GDQ events.
On July 12, 2026—the day following the conclusion of SGDQ 2026—a Hotfix show was held to mark the 30th anniversary of the Metal Slug franchise, with sponsorship from its publisher SNK. The stream faced criticism due to the current ownership of SNK by the Misk Foundation—an entity tied to Saudi Arabian Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman—as community members considered it to be hypocritical for GDQ to be accepting sponsorships tied to a country known for its poor human rights record (including suppression of women's and LGBT rights). Amid the criticism, GDQ halted the stream and issued an apology, stating that the sponsorship conflicted with its values of inclusivity, and that it would "review and strengthen our process for evaluating future sponsors and partners, including closer examination of companies’ ownership, to make sure they're aligned with our values."


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website