Barbie is a 2023 fantasy comedy film directed by Greta Gerwig from a screenplay she wrote with Noah Baumbach. It is the first live-action film based on the eponymous fashion dolls by Mattel, following numerous animated films and specials. The film stars Margot Robbie as the titular character and Ryan Gosling as Ken, and follows the duo on a journey of self-discovery after the former experiences an existential crisis; Robbie also serves as one of the film's producers. The ensemble supporting cast includes America Ferrera, Kate McKinnon, Issa Rae, Rhea Perlman, and Will Ferrell.
Barbie had its world premiere at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles on July 9, 2023, followed by its European premiere at Empire Leicester Square in London on July 12. The film was released theatrically in the United States, the United Kingdom, and most other territories on July 21 through Warner Bros. Pictures. Its concurrent release with Universal Pictures's Oppenheimer was the catalyst for the "Barbenheimer" phenomenon, encouraging audiences to see both films as a double feature. Produced on a budget of $128–145 million, Barbie grossed $1.447 billion worldwide. It became the highest-grossing film of 2023, the highest-grossing comedy film of all time, the highest-grossing film by a solo female director (and the first to cross the $1 billion mark), and the highest-grossing release in Warner Bros. Pictures history. Barbie received widespread critical acclaim, with particular praise towards its direction, screenplay, cast performances, cinematography, costume design, production design, and music. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 88% based on 507 reviews.
Barbie garnered awards and nominations in a wide assortment of categories, with recognition for its direction, screenplay, performances, music, and production values. At the 96th Academy Awards, the film received eight nominations including Best Picture, winning Best Original Song for "What Was I Made For?". Its accompanying soundtrack album and score were further recognized at the 66th Annual Grammy Awards, earning twelve nominations and winning in three categories. Barbie received a leading nine nominations at the 81st Golden Globe Awards, including Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy, and won the inaugural Cinematic and Box Office Achievement award. At the 29th Critics' Choice Awards, Barbie's eighteen nominations (leading to six award wins) were the most for any film in the organization's history. The film also received five nominations at the 77th British Academy Film Awards. Both the National Board of Review and the American Film Institute named Barbie one of the Top Ten Films of 2023. It received 24 nominations from the Online Film and Television Association awards, the most nominations ever for a film from those awards.


== Selected Accolades ==


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Awards for Barbie at IMDb