Punxsutawney Phil () is a groundhog residing in Young Township near Punxsutawney, Pennsylvania, United States, who is the central figure in Punxsutawney's annual Groundhog Day celebration.


== Overview ==
The Punxsutawney Groundhog Day celebration is rooted in Germanic tradition that says that if a hibernating animal casts a shadow on February 2, the Christian celebration of Candlemas, winter and cold weather will last another six weeks. If no shadow is seen, legend says, spring will come early. In Germany, the tradition evolved into a myth that if the sun came out on Candlemas, a hedgehog would cast its shadow, predicting snow all the way into May. When German immigrants settled in Pennsylvania, they transferred the tradition onto local fauna, replacing hedgehogs with groundhogs. Several towns in the region on either side of the US-Canada border hold similar Groundhog Day events, though Punxsutawney's event is the most famous.
Punxsutawney's annual civic festival is held on February 2 each year. The central event is a ceremony, which begins well before the winter sunrise, where Phil emerges from his temporary home on Gobbler's Knob, located in a rural area about 2 miles (3 km) southeast of the town. According to the tradition, if Phil sees his shadow and returns to his hole, he has predicted six more weeks of winter-like weather. If Phil does not see his shadow, he has predicted an "early spring." The event formally began in 1887, although its roots go back even further. The event, and other groundhog-related events throughout the year, are organized by the Punxsutawney Groundhog Club's "Inner Circle" – recognizable by their top hats and tuxedos.
The event is based upon a communal light-hearted suspension of disbelief which ascribes fantastical abilities to Phil. Ostensibly, Phil communicates his prediction to the president of the Inner Circle, who can magically understand his "Groundhogese" due to possession of an ancient acacia wood cane.  The president then directs the vice president to read the a corresonding scroll (one is prepared for each potential outcome), announcing Phil's forecast.

The suspension of disbelief extends to the assertion that Phil is infallible, and occasional incorrect predictions are the errors of those in charge of translating the message rather than Phil himself. Empirical estimates place the predictions' accuracy between 35% and 41%. Additionally, it is asserted that Phil is the same groundhog who has been making preductions since the 19th century, sustained by drinks of "groundhog punch" or "elixir of life" administered at the annual Groundhog Picnic in the fall.Outside of Groundhog Day, Phil resided with a mate, Phyllis, at the Punxsutawney Memorial Library in a climate-controlled environment. In March 2024, the Inner Circle announced that Phil had sired two babies, the first time in the history of the event that such a siring had happened; the birth surprised the Inner Circle, which had assumed that groundhogs do not breed in captivity. As a result of the births, the Groundhog club was working to build a larger environment for the family at Gobbler's Knob.
Phil first received his name in 1961. The origins of the name are unclear, but speculation suggests that it may have been indirectly named after Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh.


== Reception ==
The event in Punxsutawney attracted crowds of approximately 2,000 prior to 1993. However, the popularity of the film Groundhog Day brought significantly more attention to the event, with annual crowds rising to 10,000–20,000. The event has been streamed online each year since 2018. The ceremony in 2021 took place without any crowds, due to COVID-19 pandemic restrictions.
Three governors of Pennsylvania have attended the festivities while in office: Ed Rendell in 2003, Tom Corbett in 2012, and Josh Shapiro in 2023, 2024 and 2025. Shapiro named Phil state meteorologist during the 2024 ceremony.
In some cases where Phil's prognostications have been incorrect, organizations have jokingly made legal threats against the groundhog. Such tongue-in-cheek actions have been made by a prosecutor in Ohio, the Monroe County, Pennsylvania sheriff's office, and the Merrimack, New Hampshire Police Department. People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals object to the event, claiming that Phil is put under stress. They suggest replacing Phil with a robotic groundhog.


== In media and popular culture ==

Phil and the town of Punxsutawney were portrayed in the 1993 film Groundhog Day. However, the movie was actually filmed in Woodstock, Illinois.
In Groundhog Day, the 2016 Broadway musical adaptation of the film, Phil is ascribed a more mythical role.
In 1995, Phil flew to Chicago for a guest appearance on The Oprah Winfrey Show, which aired on Groundhog Day, February 2, 1995.
A 2002 episode of the children's animated series Stanley, titled "Searching for Spring", featured Punxsutawney Phil.
Phil was the main attraction in "Groundhog Day", the April 10, 2005, episode of the MTV series Viva La Bam. In the episode, street skater Bam Margera holds a downhill race in honor of Punxsutawney Phil at Bear Creek Mountain Resort in Macungie, Pennsylvania.
The Pennsylvania Lottery's mascot is a groundhog named Gus, referred to in commercials as "the second most famous groundhog in Pennsylvania", in deference to Phil. Since the Groundhog Club Inner Circle has trademarked the use of the name "Punxsutawney Phil," no commercial entity may use the name without permission.
Phil is the protagonist of the 2024 play How to Kill a Rodent. In the play, Canadians Guy and Carrie go to Punxsutawney to commit an act of terrorism against the United States by assassinating Phil on live television.


== Historical predictions ==


=== Predictive accuracy ===


== See also ==
Balzac Billy, the official groundhog of Balzac, Alberta, Canada
Buckeye Chuck, the official groundhog of Marion, Ohio, United States
Fred la Marmotte, the official groundhog of Val-d'Espoir, Quebec, Canada
General Beauregard Lee, the official groundhog of Jackson, Georgia, United States (and by extension, the entire Southern US)
Gus the Groundhog, mascot of the Pennsylvania Lottery
Sand Mountain Sam, a Virginia opossum who is part of the Groundhog Day celebrations of Albertville, Alabama, United States
Shubenacadie Sam, the official groundhog of Shubenacadie, Nova Scotia, Canada
Staten Island Chuck, the official groundhog of New York City, New York, United States
Stormy Marmot, a yellow-bellied marmot who is part of the Groundhog Day celebrations of Aurora, Colorado, United States
Wiarton Willie, the official groundhog of Wiarton, Ontario, Canada


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Potter, Sean (2008). "February 2, 1886: The First Groundhog Day in Punxsutawney, Pennsylvania". Weatherwise. 61 (1): 16–17. Bibcode:2008Weawi..61a..16P. doi:10.3200/WEWI.61.1.16-17. S2CID 191332194.
Moutran, Julia Spencer (1987). The story of Punxsutawney Phil, "the fearless forecaster". Avon, Connecticut: Literary Publications. ISBN 978-0-9617819-0-3.
Benesh, Julie Ellen (2011). Becoming Punxsutawney Phil: Symbols and metaphors of transformation in Groundhog Day (PhD Thesis). Fielding Graduate University. Archived from the original on February 5, 2015. Retrieved February 2, 2012.
Aaron, Michael A.; Boyd, Brewster B.; Curtis, Melanie J.; Sommers, Paul M. (2001). "Punxsutawney's Phenomenal Phorecaster" (PDF). The College Mathematics Journal. 32 (1): 26–29. doi:10.2307/2687216. JSTOR 2687216. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 13, 2012.


== External links ==
Gobbler's Knob Tradition Archived February 2, 2016, at the Wayback Machine
Groundhog.org. the official site of the Punxsutawney Groundhog Club.
The Oddities of Groundhog Day. Onward State.
Visiting Phil at Punxsutawney Library