The United States Secret Service uses code names for U.S. presidents, first ladies, and other prominent persons and locations. The use of such names was originally for security purposes and dates to a time when sensitive electronic communications were not routinely encrypted; today, the names simply serve for purposes of brevity, clarity, and tradition. The Secret Service does not choose these names, however. The White House Communications Agency maintains a list that candidates choose from, often choosing ones that resonate with them personally.
According to an established protocol, good codewords are unambiguous words that can be easily pronounced and readily understood by those who transmit and receive voice messages by radio or telephone regardless of their native language. Traditionally, all family members' code names start with the same letter.
The code names change over time for security purposes, but are often publicly known. For security, code names are generally picked from a list of such 'good' words, but avoiding the use of common words which could likely be intended to mean their normal definitions.


== Presidents and their families ==


== Vice presidents and their families ==
Spiro Agnew – Pathfinder
Judy Agnew – Photograph
Nelson Rockefeller – Sandstorm
Happy Rockefeller – Shooting Star or Stardust
Walter Mondale – Cavalier
Joan Mondale – Cameo
Ted Mondale – Centurion
Eleanor Mondale – Calico
William Mondale – Chessman
Dan Quayle – Scorecard or Supervisor
Marilyn Quayle – Sunshine

Al Gore – Sundance or Sawhorse
Tipper Gore – Skylark
Karenna Gore – Smurfette
Kristin Gore – Silhouette
Sarah Gore – Screwdriver
Albert Gore III – Shortstop
Dick Cheney – Angler
Lynne Cheney – Author
Elizabeth Cheney – Apollo
Mary Cheney – Alpine
Mike Pence – Hoosier
Karen Pence – Hummingbird
Kamala Harris – Pioneer
Doug Emhoff – Playmaker
Cole Emhoff – Pirate
Ella Emhoff – Pickle
JD Vance – Bobcat


== Political candidates and their spouses ==
U.S. Secret Service codenames are often given to high-profile political candidates (such as presidential and vice presidential candidates), and their respective families and spouses who are assigned U.S. Secret Service protection. These codenames often differ from those held if they are elected or those from prior periods if they held positions needing codenames.


== Government officials ==
Kennedy Administration
Cabinet
Secretary of State Dean Rusk – Freedom
Staff
Rear Adm. George Burkley (Physician to the president) – Market
Senior military aide General Chester Clifton – Watchman
Associate Press Secretary Andrew Hatcher – Winner
Assistant Press Secretary Malcolm Kilduff – Warrior
Personal secretary Evelyn Lincoln – Willow
Air Force aide Godfrey McHugh – Wing
Special assistant and appointments secretary Kenneth O'Donnell – Wand
Naval aide Captain Tazewell Shepard – Witness
White House secretary Priscilla Wear – Fiddle
White House secretary Jill Cowen – Faddle
Lyndon Johnson Administration
Staff
Walter Jenkins – Vigilant
Pierre Salinger – Wayside
Nixon Administration
Cabinet
Secretary of State and National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger – Woodcutter
His wife, Nancy Kissinger – Woodlark
Staff
White House photographer Ollie Atkins – Hawkeye
Gulf Coast Regional Chairman James Baker – Fencing Master or Foxtail
Deputy Assistant to the President Dwight Chapin – Watchdog
Domestic Affairs Advisor Kenneth Reese Cole Jr. – Spectator
John Ehrlichman – Wisdom
White House aide Tim Elbourne – Snapshot
Secretary of State Alexander Haig – Claw Hammer
White House Chief of Staff H. R. Haldeman – Welcome
Assistant to Haldeman Lawrence Higby – Semaphore
Air Force aide James D. Hughes – Red Barron
Communications Director Herbert G. Klein – Witness
Dr. William Lukash (Physician to the president) – Sawhorse
Senior assistant Clark MacGregor – Whipcrack
Assistant for Legislative Affairs William Timmons – Windowpane
Dr. Walter Tkach (Physician to the president) – Signature
Director of the White House Office of Presidential Advance, later Director of the National Park Service, Ronald H. Walker – Roadrunner
Personal secretary Rose Mary Woods – Strawberry
Press Secretary and Assistant to the President Ron Ziegler – Whale Boat
Presidential spokesman Ken W. Clawson – Thunderstorm
Ford Administration
Staff
Press Secretary Ron Nessen – Clam Chowder
Deputy Chief of Staff, later Chief of Staff, Dick Cheney – Backseat
Carter Administration
Cabinet
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance – Fade Away
Secretary of Defense Harold Brown – Finley
Staff
National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzeziński – Hawkeye
Director of the Office of Management and Budget Bert Lance – Dumbo
Reagan Administration
Attorney General William French Smith – Flivver
Secretary of Education Terrel Bell – Foxcraft
George W. Bush Administration
Scott McClellan – Matrix (generic name for White House press secretary)
Chief of Staff Andy Card – Potomac, later Patriot 
Chief of Staff Josh Bolten – Fatboy
Secretary of Labor Elaine Chao – Firebird
Obama Administration
Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel – Black Hawk
Tim Geithner – Fencing Master (generic codename for Secretary of the Treasury)
First Trump administration
Senior Counselor to the President Kellyanne Conway – Blueberry


== Other individuals ==

Israel
Prime Minister Menachem Begin – Cedar
Hasia Begin Milo – Crystal
Commonwealth realms
Queen Elizabeth II – Kittyhawk, Redfern
King Charles III – Principal or Unicorn
United States
Senator Howard Baker (R-Tennessee) – Snapshot
Actor Antonio Banderas – Zorro
Congressman and Speaker of the House Thomas P. "Tip" O'Neill – Flag Day
Florida banker and businessman, confidant of President Nixon, Bebe Rebozo – Christopher
Social secretary to First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt, and mistress to President Franklin D. Roosevelt, Lucy Mercer Rutherfurd – Mrs. Johnson
Singer and actor Frank Sinatra – Napoleon
Senator Strom Thurmond (R-South Carolina) – Footprint
Vatican
Pope John Paul II – Halo


== Locations, objects, places and parts of Secret Service ==
U.S. Secret Service codenames are not only given to people; they are often given to places, locations and even objects, such as aircraft like Air Force One, and vehicles such as the Presidential State Car.

Joint Base Andrews, in Prince George's County, Maryland – Acrobat or Andy
The Presidential Motorcade – Bamboo
The Harry S Truman Building (Department of State headquarters) – Birds-eye
Camp David, presidential retreat in Catoctin Mountain Park, in Frederick County, Maryland – Cactus or Buckeye
The Vice President's office – Cobweb
The Vice President's staff – Pacemaker
The Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, New York City – Roadhouse
Air Force One – Angel or Cowpuncher
The U.S. Presidential State Car – Stagecoach
Follow-up car – Halfback
The White House – Castle (Crown referring to the Executive Mansion, the central representative and office spaces of the White House)
The Capitol – Punch bowl
The White House Situation Room – Cement Mixer
Eisenhower Executive Office Building (part of the White House Complex) – Central
Reagan National Airport – Curbside
The temporary residence of the President – Charcoal or Base
The Pentagon – Calico
White House garage – Carpet
J. Edgar Hoover Building (FBI Headquarters) – Cork
Lyndon Baines Johnson's ranch – Volcano
Secret Service Counterassault Team – Hawkeye
Secret Service Counter-sniper Team – Hercules


== In fiction ==
In popular culture, the practice of assigning codenames is often used to provide additional verisimilitude in fictional works about the executive branch, or high-ranking governmental figures.

1600 Penn
First Son Standrich "Skip" Gilchrist Jr. – Meatball
Air Force One
President James Marshall – Boy Scout
The American President
President Andrew Shepherd – Liberty
Chasing Liberty
First Daughter Anna Foster – Liberty
Designated Survivor
President Tom Kirkman – Phoenix (formerly Glasses during his time as Secretary of Housing and Urban Development)
First Daughter
First Daughter Samantha Mackenzie – Lucky Charm
First Kid
President Paul Davenport – Eagle
First Son Luke Davenport – Prince
House of Cards
President Frank Underwood – Little John
President Claire Underwood – Lone Star
In the Line of Fire
The President – Traveler
Jericho
President Jon Tomarchio – Condor
The Night Agent
Maddie Redfield (VP Daughter) – Badger
Omar Zadar (PIF leader) – Osprey
Paradise
President Cal Bradford – Wildcat
The Prodigal Daughter
President Florentyna Kane – Baroness
Red, White & Royal Blue
First Son Alexander Claremont-Diaz – Barracuda
First Daughter June Claremont-Diaz – Bluebonnet
Prince Henry – Bishop
Scandal
President Fitzgerald Thomas "Fitz" Grant III – Falcon
First Lady Melody Margaret "Mellie" Grant – Foxtail
White House Chief of Staff Abigail "Abby" Whelan – Firebrand
The Sentinel
President John Ballentine – Classic
First Lady Sara Ballentine – Cincinnati
Squeeze Me
The President – Mastodon
The First Lady – Mockingbird
Tom Clancy's novels
Unnamed President in Clear and Present Danger – Wrangler
President Jack Ryan in Debt of Honor and Executive Orders – Swordsman
Dr. Caroline "Cathy" Ryan in Executive Orders – Surgeon
Olivia "Sally" Ryan in Executive Orders – Shadow
Jack Ryan Jr. in Executive Orders – Shortstop
Katie Ryan in Executive Orders – Sandbox
Kyle Daniel Ryan in The Bear and the Dragon – Sprite
George Winston (Secretary of the Treasury) in Executive Orders – Trader
Benjamin Goodley (National Security Advisor) in Executive Orders – Cardsharp
Arnold Van Damm (White House Chief of Staff) in Executive Orders and The Bear and the Dragon – Carpenter
Callie Weston (Chief Speechwriter) in Executive Orders and The Bear and the Dragon – Calliope
Scott Adler (Secretary of State) in Executive Orders and The Bear and the Dragon – Eagle
Veep
Vice President Selina Meyer – Duchess
The West Wing
President Josiah "Jed" Bartlet – Eagle or Liberty
Zoey Bartlet – Bookbag
C. J. Cregg – Flamingo
Sam Seaborn – Princeton
Gus Westin (grandson of Jed Bartlet) – Tonka
Arnold Vinick – Big Sur


== See also ==
00 Agent § Origin of nomenclature
CIA cryptonym
List of nicknames of United States Presidents


== References ==